---
layout: paper
title: Multiple Ecological Axes Drive Molecular Evolution of Cone Opsins in Beloniform Fishes
image: /images/papers/JME2024.png
authors: Chau KD, Hauser FE, Nynatten AV, Daane JM, Harris MP, Chang BSW, Lovejoy NR
year: 2024
ref: Chau KD, Hauser FE, Nynatten AV, <u>Daane JM</u>, Harris MP, Chang BSW, Lovejoy NR. 2024. <i>Journal of Molecular Evolution</i> 92:93–103.
journal: "Journal of Molecular Evolution 92:93–103"
pdf: /pdfs/papers/Chau-JME-2024.pdf
doi: 10.1007/s00239-024-10156-1
---

Ecological and evolutionary transitions offer an excellent opportunity to examine the molecular basis of adaptation. Fishes of the order Beloniformes include needlefishes, flyingfishes, halfbeaks, and allies, and comprise over 200 species occupying a wide array of habitats-from the marine epipelagic zone to tropical rainforest rivers. These fishes also exhibit a diversity of diets, including piscivory, herbivory, and zooplanktivory. We investigated how diet and habitat affected the molecular evolution of cone opsins, which play a key role in bright light and colour vision and are tightly linked to ecology and life history. We analyzed a targeted-capture dataset to reconstruct the evolutionary history of beloniforms and assemble cone opsin sequences. We implemented codon-based clade models of evolution to examine how molecular evolution was affected by habitat and diet. We found high levels of positive selection in medium- and long-wavelength beloniform opsins, with piscivores showing increased positive selection in medium-wavelength opsins and zooplanktivores showing increased positive selection in long-wavelength opsins. In contrast, short-wavelength opsins showed purifying selection. While marine/freshwater habitat transitions have an effect on opsin molecular evolution, we found that diet plays a more important role. Our study suggests that evolutionary transitions along ecological axes produce complex adaptive interactions that affect patterns of selection on genes that underlie vision.
